12 Rue de la Sorbonne, Paris. 15 January 1893.
My dear Doctor Hugo Schuchardt,
so you are still too proud, or too unwell, or too busy (if still alive) to write to this admiring bascophile. I heard a little while ago from your former pupil DrJosef Priebsch who is still in London. I see a good deal of his clever young friend Mr Theodor Reitterer, who knows Anglo Saxon and speaks English almost perfectly. He is engaged as German Professor at the Institut Rudy, 7 Rue Royale, and I am going to refresh my knowledge of German by attending the class. Do you mean to publish a critique on the big book of the inventor of the Azkuence language? The December number of the Revue des Bibliothèques, containing my second article on Vinson, will appear this week, and as soon as I get my separatabdruck I shall send a copy to you, though you never acknowledged the receipt of the first. I returned yesterday to the Comte de Charencey the portion of my Analytical Concordance to the Leiçarragan verb which will appear in the forthcoming volume of the Report of his Philological Society of which MrA. D’Abbadie used to be President. If I get a tirage à part of that you shall have it too. I have begun it by a little preface in English. I am still at work continuing this Herculean undertaking.  I hope that operae pretium erit – It has cost me much time and fatigue. I am inclined to think that Inchauspe is right in saying that edin only exists in the imagination of MrW. J. Van Eys. Do you think that Roma may be a metathesis of ORMA = paries terreus a word as old as Andres de Poça in Spanish Basque? or that 
Lutetia Parisiorum may be from 
Lutesia which according to Novia de Salcedo means vallum? These may be relics of times when the Iberians where spread in Italy and France and when a city was a fortified camp. I think 
Oreguis explanation of Pyrenaei by Erpiña = summit very likely to be right - Do you think that Slovenian sever = Norden, Nordwind, may be related to Basque Iper, ipar, with the same sense? and then to Iberus, Siberia, Hibernia? & Hyper-borean? I notice in Slovenian the word petelin = hahn: that reminds me of the Spanish pitilin =  membrum virile – in English 
cock, which in the Ardèche patois is 
coёque. would this be 
ur-Baskisch – ? might the German 
ur (I have thought of this nearly 7 years) be from Basqueur as water is in a sense the origin of all things? Lécluse and Larramendi & Novia de Salcedo give godaria as the Basque of chocolat – would this be from goiz-edaria = morning-drink? 
Inchauspe admits it is but says it means properly boisson in general. However I have reason to know that 
Inchauspes best intellectual days are past - I often have Basque problems to propose to you but your silence is rather chilling. Vinson was married last Monday at Bordeaux I am told! He has promised to give me his edition of the O. M. of Pouvreau. I wrote to the Eskualduna on the 29  of last month to announce the news which I got on the 26th or 27th from the Revd. Llewelyn Thomas Vice Principal of Jesus College, Oxford, that He had obtained, on the 13th Dec:, leave from Ld Macclesfield to transport to the Bodleian Library the manuscripts of Pierre d’Urte and to copy them there for purposes of publication. My letter appeared with 3 misprints in the last number but one. In the Gramatica Berria the word alfabeto is translated kruasa (note 1) I learn from various parts of the French Basque region that this must be the French croix plus the article a as formerly the A.B.C. lessons and lesson books began with the sign of the Cross - I find in Barettis Italian English Dictionary under the word sáltero, Christ-Cross Alphabet, A.B.C. or Cris-Cross-row (reihe) which goes to confirm this explanation. My Esthonian friend Dido gives me the word Lill as meaning in his tongue what lili does in Basque or Egyptianhririt, Coptichriri namely flower – from the Manuel de la langue Egyptienne par V. Loret. Paris 1889 I find that the first of the three seasons of the old Egyptian year was called shait = la saison de l’inondation. This would seem to render possible à priori the explanation of urte = year by its primitive sense of inundation – Do you know the form 
darozkudazu used between Baigorri & Les Aldudes for “you have them to me”? Leiçarraga in Romans translates vulva by um-unci - you know they call an eggcup arroltze-unci – so the womb was to the Basque the child-vessel, child holder – le contenant d’enfant. The last volume of the Oroimengarria of San Sebastian for Noel 1892 giving the text of the best compositions contains a sign of decadence - gauz-bat. = a thing – it would be as well to write ait-bat for “a father” Gauza is from causa and it’s a final  is not the separable article. Will your Academy do nothing for the publishing of old Basque texts with translation and notes? I have not seen in any Dictionary the Souletin word used in the Pastoral of St Helen CHESTATZEA = le goûter, le déguster – it is known to 
Inchauspe & Larrieu. The latter lunched with me a short time back and is revising, as Inchauspe has done, my copy of the Bayonne text of the Pastoral just mentioned - The whole of which I had translated into English by the morning of the 9
th of November last. It is very interesting, and I think they ought to give me money enough to have it printed. They say Gladstone is learning Basque. He went to Sare during his recent stay at Biarritz.
I now wish you a (note 2) Basking new year and remain
E. S. Dodgson.
15 Jan: 1893.

Excuse my untidy writing.
 (note 3)I have nearly finished Carbonis Sardinian sermons. He writes the article i so and i sa instead of as it ought to be iso and isa as representing ipsam and ipsum.  (note 4) We read your name at Picots class the other day in 
Scainens (note 5) philological history of Roumanian, an interesting book. I possess your friend Meyers Albanian Dictionary.
_____________________________________________1 En OEH: Dodgson es la única fuente para kruasa ‘alfabeto’.2 Dogdgson setzt am linken Rand fort.3 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite: 4 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite.5 Dodgson meint vermutlich Lazăr Șăineanu und seine Istoria filologieě române; studiĭ critice, Bucuresci: Editura Librărieĭ Socecŭ, 1892.