220 South Broad Street
Philadelphia Penna
May 1882
Dear Sir
I have read with great pleasure your very kind letter of May 10
th. You would hardly suppose that any man who had ever written a book, could have so dismissed it from his mind as I have my 
Pidgin English Ballads (note 1). I do not think I have looked into it more than once for three years. It was received so badly and received so unkindly that I grew sick of it. It is a most incomprehensible thing that reviewers because they do not like a 
subject must needs abuse a book. It was because Pidgin was not easy to read that it was disliked. I experienced a great deal of this with my Breitmann Ballads (note 2). A publisher offered me a “high” price if I would write him a volume of such Anglo German songs – without any German words!
As soon as I can find where Hoffman Atkinson (note 3) is  I will write to him that he may send you his odd little brochure on the Yokohama dialect (note 4). I wrote the article in the New Quarterly Mag (note 5) to which you refer, though if you had not mentioned the name of the mag.e I could not have recalled it. I have led such a varied and busy life of late years that such things pass away like vapour. 
Are you aware that beneath the Louisiana Creole – French there lies hidden a much more esoteric - a deeper and darker dialect? This is the Gumbo patois (note 6), consisting of Creole French, very much mingled with what is said to be Congo African but which is much more probably a mixture of West African tongues or words. This Gumbo is kept very secret and is peculiarly the language of the Voudoo (or Vūdū) negroes. The Voudoo is a kind of conjuror, sorcerer or magician. So far as I have learned (and I have learned a great deal) their rites and practices correspond precisely  to those of Africa, as these do to the Shamans of Central or Eastern Asia. The word Voudoo is derived from a Western Indian word Vaudoux (French orthography) signifying serpent. It is called by our more ignorant blacks here Hūdū. There is a very famous Voudoo black doctor – (a great rascal I am told) - who rides in his own carriage, and who lives not ten minutes walk from where I now reside. 
My work on the Gypsies (note 7) which has just appeared has as far been very kindly received. Such of your Austrian Zigeuner as I have seen here - only 3 - seem to be very nice pleasant people. Yesterday afternoon I went with my niece Miss Elizabeth Robins (note 8) (who speaks anglo-zigeunerisch very well) to visit the old poet Walt Whitman – after seeing him we took a walk in the country, and being thirsty, I went into a beerhouse, leaving my niece without. While there, in came a wild looking Strassenlaufer or 
Landstreicher (Landloofer, Hollandisch) a dark, hawk-faced fellow, a wandering umbrella mender. He spoke German, but I saw in his face that he was Gypsy. But he would not admit it – he denied it – and when I said “Bist du nicht Romani?” he replied “Nein ich bin ein Protestant.” But though I was disappointed I said to the Wirthinn – “Giebt dem lieben Mann ein Glass Bier.” Whereupon with a droll look he said “Was ist chadscherdi (note 9)?” To which I replied “Du infamer lügender Schelm – chadscherdi ist Schnapps – was ist Pani?” He replied “Wasser und manno ist Brot.” He was really a Gypsy and we both burst out laughing heartily. The Wirthsleute thought we were talking French. There are two camps of old fashioned English gypsies near this city now. They live in tents but have a carpet on the ground and only drink out of silver cups. One of them showed me a watch and chain, on Sunday with the jeweller’s bill. It had cost 457 dollars. I never saw  so much gold in a watch and chain as there was in this – Gypsies are the same all the world over. Do you have the Atlantic Monthly in Graz? If so I wish that you would kindly look over the numbers during the past year, and examine a few articles by my niece Miss Robins. They are on Old Hindoo Humour (note 10) – Mischief in the Middle Ages (note 11) – 
Loki (note 12) and The Evolution of Magic (note 13). They are separate chapters from a large work as yet unpublished. I do not think I ever read anything more vigorously masculine from a woman’s pen than the Loki and the Hindoo Humour. If you can not see them in Gratz I will send them to you. If you do not make a specialty of such reading – (though I should be ashamed if such a scholar did not) I wish that you would induce some friend who does, to read them. A few lines in any German publication as to these articles, would do the young lady much good.  The work of which these articles are a part is to called 
Mischief in Animals and Men (note 14). It is very remarkable that I have never found in any literature, a book or even an article on Mischief as the word is generally understood in English. I think that Schalkheit translates it. It is the reckless Muthwilligkeit which is indulged in without heed as to others sufferings, yet which is not deliberately evil. My niece treats it entirely from an Evolutionary physiological point of view. She is very desirous of receiving suggestions from some German who could refer her to German works which could aid her. Her book will be I think not only 
solid but extremely genial. 
I have seen several times in the American newspapers a few lines stating that you are engaged on a work on dialects. 
N. Truebner (note 15) in London is as good as any American bookseller to order any  thing from. When you write to him tell him that it will be a great personal favour to me if he will aid you. I am a very intimate friend of his.
You should learn German Gypsy. It is very easy and is a very beautiful soft language. Has anything been published of late on Zigeunerisches in Germany?
It is worth mentioning that all over the Western United States as well as in the Southern (US.) the ground nut (Arachiahypogaea) is called a gooba pea. In Africa it is always called simply a gū
ba or gooba. The negroes and indeed the common children here in Philadelphia say Sadi (a as in hat – the sound does not exist in German) for I thank you. It comes from Africa but is I believe a corrupt Arabic form of Saïdi! (luck to you!)
I believe that I wrote all my Pidgin English ballads except Norval & Excelsior.  But I really have not a copy of the book by me nor do I own one! I recal (note 16) it with as much pleasure as a boy does a whipping! 
The Gumbo patois is said to be used extensively on the North Eastern coast of South America where Voodooism most prevails. I understand that it is a secret language. I will try to get you specimens of it. I suspect that there are several strange 
lingoes in Louisiana – such as Franco negro Spanish and other mixtures. There must certainly be a Spanish Pidgin in Cuba. In fact so many thousand coolies many of whom speak different Chinese languages must be forced to form a 
pidgin in every country where they are assembled. I will inquire into this for you. 
Yours very sincerely
Charles G. Leland

P.S. Gumbo is the name with as of a kind of soup made from okras (in Arabic 
bamieh) chicken, oysters & crabs. It is also a negro Vor-nahm
_____________________________________________1 Leland (1876).2 Leland ([1868] 
1876).3 
Col. Atkinson (1839-1901) fought in the American Civil war as a commander of the First West Virginia Cavalry. After the war, he went to Japan, where he came into contact with the 
Yokohama Pidgin ([s.n.]. 1901).4 Atkinson (1879).5 Daniels (1948: 806) states that: “The review is anonymous, but as its author says he had published a work on pidgin English some years before, he was probably the prolific C. G. Leland, whose Pidgin-English Sing-Song had appeared in 1876”. This assumption is confirmed by the present letter. The review originally appeared in The New Quarterly Magazine, July 1879 and was reprinted in August 1879 in 
The Living Age 142.1836. 496-501 (Leland 1879a).6 The distinction between ‘Gumbo’ and Louisiana Creole is not a common assumption. Today, Louisiana Creole is sometimes derogatorily referred to as ‘Gumbo’ (cf. Klingler 2003).7 Leland (1882b).8 
Elizabeth Robins Pennell (1855-1936), Leland’s niece, author of various essays, art criticisms, biographies, including her uncle’s biography, travel books, and a novel (Kruesi 1999). According to Kruesi (1999: 4), “Elizabeth found inspiration in the work of her uncle, the author Charles Godfrey Leland (1824-1903), who was a stimulating companion, introducing her to other writers, including his friends Walt Whitman (1819-1892) and George H. Boker (1823-1890). Leland took her with him on his visits to gypsy encampments in New Jersey and Pennsylvania for his book The Gypsies. He encouraged her to write and gave her introductions in the offices of Philadelphia's newspapers.”9 Cf. Leland (1872).10 Robins (1882a).11 Robins (1881).12 Robins (1882b).13 Robins (1882c).14 
Apparently remained unpublished.15 Nicolaus Trübner (1817-1884), publisher in London. After his death, his publishing house was merged with 
Kegan and Trench. Leland mentions 
Paul Kegan in an earlier letter (Steiff 1894).16 Sic.