Hôtel Cadete, Vizeu, Portugal. 24 Nov: 1893.
Dear Dr. Schuchardt, 
the Revd. J. I. de Arana says the same thing as you about nachaco and nachacho in Capanaga. De Charencey has not yet sent back Van Eys autograph copy of the 2nd part of the work, (But I am convinced there are still some errors in that, though I sent it back to the author for revision), neither will Van Eys lend me the original. So I expect my 2nd part will be much less perfect than the first. They promise me the whole will be ready by the 15th of December but I dont much trust them. An index of the 500 forms of the verb in Capanaga will be thrown in. I hope that the Academy of tonight will contain my article on the language of Capanaga – I might easily have made it longer, but feared that that would lead to its exclusion. Till you prove the contrary, I shall consider that I have found the key to 
leilão and ne-ska. Do you think Portuguese 
Loiça = Toda a especie de vasos de barro, is from Basque loi or lohi = mud, whence the place named Lohizun = muddy, marshy, and Loyola = mud-workshop, or tuilerie? I know you will say ”no”, just to dishearten me! Do you think Urbion the name of the 
serra where de  Douro has its ur-begi may be a Basque word? Do you think the river name UL in Portugal may be the Basque UR which often is used for river? or that Isna and Sever and Liz, and Lena (as I have often thought Lena in Siberia might be), and Arnoia (cf: Arno in Tuscany) & Arda, and Asseca (at Tavíra) and Sabor may be of Basque origin? or that of the rivers Vascão and Neiva? You will see that I have been studying the Chorographia de Portugal (Guillard, Ailland & Cia Lisboa 242 Rua Aurea) published a few months ago. It contains an article entitled ”Portugal Glottologico” by Leite de Vasconcellos and a ”carta dialectologica do Continente Portugues” also by him, which he claims to be the first of its kind. I should much like to go and study on the spots the dialects of Tras Os Montes which he mentions as specially important ”Mirandes, Riodonores, Guadramiles”. I find there is a town of Leiria in Portugal[,] that dolmens are called anta which recalls De Charenceys suggestive attempt to connect antae in Latin with Basque 
ate = door, gate. The highest range of hills in the kingdom is that called Larouco, on the frontier of Galicia, which I derive from Basque larre. Another place in Portugal, among many others, which looks like Basque is Ougela. I must tell you that I have not yet found an 
educated Portuguese who has observed the phenomenon of Bai, for yes in general, and not a way of pronouncing vae = he or she or it goes. But those people with whom I have spoken are not philological observers. One however told me I was quite right in affirming its existence in the province of Orense. Another Basque-looking mountain name in Portugal is Oural on the banks of the Lenia, which I think I told you is in the Bai region and may well be of Basque origin signifying mud. I saw somewhere that the Ural  river and mountains between Asia and Europe derive their name from a Turkish word meaning girdle. Is not this like Basque ugala with the same meaning? compare urarte and ugarte. Luzin is a mountain in Portugal which I should like to sweep into the catalogue of Euskarian nomenclature. They promise me my Capanaga for Dec: 15th. I don’t believe them. De Charencey and Linschmann have bought 10 copies each in advance – Quaritch sent me his Bonaparte Catalogue of the 9th but it was detained in Paris, and only reached me two days ago. How like Portuguese cerebrino is to Shakesperes Brainish in Hamlet!
“Ourreta é um valle de pastagens ou cultura entre terras ladeirentas” have we not here yet another Portuguese borrowing from Basque, very like viura = valley? What do you say about the verb in this sentence of Capanaga Ea emonbaga edugui daben bear eguin 
deusaneen aloguera, edo salarioa where the Spanish is “Si ha tenido el jornal, o salario de los criados.”?  it cannot be the equivalent, as Arana says, of 
deuseen for that is used (and only once) by Capanaga thus “Ea semeai eta criaduai iracasten deuseen dotrinea eta costumbre onac” where the Spanish has ”si enseñan a los hijos y criados dotrina y buenas costumbres” – I cannot see the way to identifying Capanagas use of these two forms, nor can I see yet what is the parsing of deusaneen. I expect you will have a keener vision. Aizkibel says that errepira means valley. It is in the hymn about St. Ignatius of which I sent you a copy in the Union Vascongada. You know what Aizkibel says about Dirauztazu, it is not applicable to the use made of it by Dechepare – nor to its occurrence in the first Basque  letter (1584), of which they omitted one line in my edition in the Union Vascongada last August. How do you translate and parse the word both in Dechepare and the letter? can it mean in the latter “represent me to yourself as giving the horses their food, or as taking care of the horses” or “the man or them making me take care of the horses”. a Basque told me he thought it might mean ”the horse or the horses make me think” “give me matter for reflection.” Arana says there were Basque catechisms printed at Pamplona before Capanaga. I dont much believe Martinez who told me Aizpitarte had written books in Guipuzcoan which had been printed. The Academy printed my letter wrongly making it look as if I thought ”Martinez the publisher” was ”the publisher” of these books. Linschmann says my contributions to Euskara 14 arrived too late.
Yours
E. S. Dodgson. 
24 Nov: 1893.

 (note 1)Marcelino Soroa is much flattered at learning that you mention him in your book. He is not capable of grammatical or etymological (note 2) reasoning upon his language. What shall I do with the superfluous first part of your book?
_____________________________________________1 Randnotiz beginnend auf der linken Seite.2 Fortsetzung am rechten Rand.