My dear Doctor Schuchardt,
after one of my too frequent sleepless nights, a trouble from which I suffer chiefly at Paris, your card received this morning in which you say a word in favour of my explanation of 
laket, which also likes Vinson for a wonder! and of my translation in the latest Revue de Linguistiques, where Vinson, without consulting me, and after I had corrected the proofs twice, turned “as beautiful as can possibly be”, which is the logical equivalent of “ecin haboro eger”, into “more beautiful than can possibly be”, which is nonsense; was very refreshing. I had some difficulty in reading some of the words at first, but your disciple DrJosef Priebsch, who has been a very kind and generous friend to me this last fortnight, and who is going to England next month helped me out. Priebsch talks too much of women, and is a bit too phlegmatic and lacking in imagination and mental quickness, but his buoyant cheerfulness and good nature are valuable qualities, and he seems fairly strong in the neolatin tongues. Of course I have urged him to take up Basque. Mocochain died at the end of 1890, and his widow and son while keeping his stock of books do not seem to trouble themselves about selling them. The city of Bayonne might do worse than buy them. It has, like the 
Bibliothèque Nationale, and likewise, I believe, by Vinsons baneful and baleful advice, refused to buy the Manuscript Basque French dictionary by Mr Gustave Grandin, written out on separate slips in alphabetical order, which are pigeonholed in two neat oaken boxes, and to be bought of Honoré Champion the bookseller of 9 Quai Voltaire here.  As far as Bayonne goes you should get books from Hourguet, the bookseller in the Arceaux du Pont Neuf. He is the most practical man there. I have always understood that Vinsons Julien of Antioch was only printed to the extent of 50 copies, but Vinsons assertions are not always gospel! It is certainly mentioned at the end of his Bibliography, and I possess a copy, given to me by MrStempf who will shortly be back at Hotel de Hollande, Rue Radziwill with his wife and only son on his return from his annual wine selling tour in Germany. He is a Baden man by birth. I returned to 
Haristoy the curé of Ciboure (Zubiburu in the 17
th century) yesterday my proofs of the rare supplement to Doihenarts proverbs, which he is about to publish, from my copy, in the Eskualduna. You shall have them in the tirage à part. I hope to copy out at Bayonne the whole of the Helen pastoral, and to publish it with a translation. Vinson has a quantity of unedited pastorals in his room at 5 Rue de Beaune here, which he neither publishes nor lends. Hannemann and Linschmann have introduced some errors into my French, for which my manuscript was not to blame, and they have irritated me very much by  refusing, for the last two numbers at least, to let me have any proofsheets to correct. in the preface which I printed in last number, which bears date “End of March” but which I only received 28 April, with a translation made here in June 1890, an i is omitted bailicateque. “
Eçagutu” at the top of the 2nd column has suffered an undue metathesis at the hands of the printer - for testamenta read testamen
tu and for “voyelle” read “voyele” (sic), for “aux” read “ceux” and separate “auança” and “deçala”. Some accents are omitted. (note 1) perhaps iaquineco would be better rendered “in certain known places” rather than “known in certain places” - instead of “difficiles” read “les plus difficiles” as I believe I wrote. Chapter V of St John has, perhaps owing to my protests about the first 4 been much better printed, I only find one mistake, namely orein instead of orain. Inchauspe having obtained from me copies of the text of La Chanson de Roland and La Divina Commedia by promising to translate both seems now to have abandonned his intention to go on! I had a postcard in Basque from Azcue yesterday. he knows you want his grammar, but he sent one to the Eskualduna and another to Inchauspe, and neither  of them even thanked him for it! Vinson did so, but has not said a word about it in the Revue de Linguistique. The poor fellow, who deserves every encouragement, has like Oregui, whose madness seems incurable, no pupils! You might buy it through Boyveau, libraire étranger Rue de la Banque, here. It swarms with errors but is very interesting. I received yesterday El III concilio de Toledo como base de la Nacionalidad Española with prologue by F. X. Simonet whom I found when I was at Granada to be a student of Basque - It is a most interesting book. The Basque part is attributed to padre Arana. The Catalan, Gallego, Portuguese, Arabic, and Castillian parts are likewise anonymous. I am going this afternoon to Count de Charenceys philological society - the sessions take place at 74 Rue Vaugirard, and are very dull. The President is meditating an edition of his Etymological Basque Dictionary and confesses I am right in changing “Souletine” into “Basse Navarraise” (it would be more logical to say “Bas Navarraise”) as the language is not low if the contry is in the title of his brochure published last year, which he gave me. I saw MrD’Abbadie at the door of my hotel at Saturday - he is much aged but walks - like a Basque! I had some talk and  a walk last Tuesday and Sunday with a zealous bascophile Mr l’abbé Piarres Harispe, born at St Jean de Luz, who lives at 37 Cours de Vincennes here. He has published something in Basque in the 
Euskalerria formerly, and also 8 volumes in French; like many of the Catholic priests he affects to think none too highly of Liçarrague, whom Inchauspe neither knows nor admires. My address till further notice is 12 Rue de la Sorbonne 
12. I shall probably start for Bayonne on the 8th of July - My library is a great encumbrance to me. I have given away a good part of it to the Sorbonne and the Bib: Nat: at St Geneviève and other libraries here, but still it burdens me. Perhaps MrPicot will consent to house it for me. I like him very much. Ba in Roumanian and 
Gothic seems certainly more than a coincidence with Basque ba. There is a river Ibar in Servia and M
rPicot says that valle in Roumanian means not only valley but river - what are valleys but river beds where water falls? am I right in connecting germanic fall with latin vallis? Even the oldest medieval form of Yroue]e[rre in the Yonne (Ica-una)  seems certainly basque; the other place names in the department which now look Euskarian are not so certainly so, but still it is not evident that they are not - see Max Quentins topographical dictionary - What can Yonnais heri, an interrogative exclamation come from? Would Basque chal have any connection with Germanic calb, calf? Novia (which they turned into Mariâ in Euskara XI!) de Salcedo is useful as a scarecrow! and is not always wrong in the meaning he attaches to words - But the best part of his dictionary, the index from the Castilian backwards and basquewards, is full of misprints, and he gives no authorities for his words and phrases, except here and there 
Larramendi. What do you make of his “enda” which even Campion does not know? I once thought I heard it in a sermon at Tolosa. If you have not seen in the Galignani Messenger of May 3 my translations in English prose of 
Campions Orreaga and the Altabiscar of Duvoisins cousin (which cousin? 
Harriet the bird shooter, and lexicological priest, who lives on milk amid the alders of Haltsou,  & who knew Erro is one of them) I may be able to get and send you a copy. Try to come with me to Basqueland this summer - a walking or riding tour in the mountains would do wonders for your health! Schwertfeger is as bad as Guisasola. I suppose he did not borrow ophir through Linschmann from me, as he does not explain it as I have for some time past done, and that independently, by op wealth (also a latin root) and iri town - I have often thought Bethulia must be a Basque town-name - I told MrD’Abbadie about your intention in the matter of Leiçarraga - he seems to be losing his enthusiasm about Basque, except in the matter of buying all 
mss and printed matter in it which he can lay hands on. Van Eys has most kindly sent me a ms copy, made by himself from his original & perfect exemplar, of nearly all the 2nd part of 
Capanaga - the rest is promised me. Azcue and Julio de Urquijo e’Ibarra at Bilbao are going to ask Truebas nephew about the  unique 
Ostolaza, which that author had among his books - It and Capanaga ought to be published together. I have wondered whether Parisii coud be from Basque ipar = north or Basque 
ibar = valley. Alexandre Bailleu, & Le Chevalier Quai des Grands Augustins besides Champion and Maisonneuve often have Basque books for sale. About a dozen new Basque books & booklets have already been published this year on both sides of the Bidassoa. As for 
Irish, which I find much more difficult than Basque, I think it ought to be written on some quite new phonetic plan, as its spelling both ancient and modern seems to have no relation to actual pronunciation, and is only of use as a clue to its etymologies. Instead of “bounden” in my translation of Helaine it would have been better to write “indebted” to bring out the force of Zordun.
Pardon my inordinate length, and believe me yours sincerely
Edward S. Dodgson
 - Paris, May X, 1892.
Priebsch sends his 
kind regards
|1| (note 2) Caer-Baris, May X, 1892.
Azkue goes to Pamplona in June on a visit to Campion whom he does not yet know except by letter.
|4| (note 3)Mr. Landerretche the old curé of Sare died in April.
_____________________________________________1 Diese Stelle, ab „for “voyelle“ read“, ist offenbar nachträglich eingefügt worden, da Dodgson dafür die gleiche Farbe verwendete wie für die Randnotizen auf Seite 1 und Seite 4.2 Diese Randnotiz auf der linken Seite wurde in einer anderen Farbe hinzugefügt.3 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite, ebenfalls in der anderen Farbe geschrieben.