Hirremburra: Pt de Galle;
12th December 1889
[?] Dr Hugo Schuchardt; Graz.
[?] Sir,
It gave me great pleasure to learn from Yr letter of the 15th November that you were interested in my “List of Portuguese words adopted by the Sinhalese”, (note 1) and further that you think I was right in my identifications excepting the term tŏppiya, respecting which you prefer Colonel Yule’s opinion I am sorry to say I have not yet consulted his Hobson-Jobson. (note 2) I had often been pressed by those who knew me well, to print some of the things I was supposed to know; by the most Revd Dr Bonjean (note 3), Catholic Archbishop of Colombo, for instance, and a young Advocate of this town who is now making translations from Dutch Records and Accounts of Ceylon; and seeing that very imperfect vocabularies were being published I ventured to print the List which has deserved your notice. In vol iii of the Orientalist (parts vii and viii) p 133 I also published a List of Dutch words adopted by the Sinhalese, which has references to the List of Portuguese Words. (note 4) This Dutch List has curious information though I should say it. I am now prepared to publish a list of Dutch terms imported into the Indo-Portuguese but do not intend to undertake this labor having recovered from a dangerous illness only lately and having need of much rest at present. Your letter, however, encouraged me to arrange for the publication of a reprint of a Ceylon Portuguese Grammar which may prove to be one of the grammars you have been endeavoring to obtain. This work I intended to undertake for some time back but put off in the hope of recovering the title page, lost in [?] in my possession. Since the publication of that Grammar, printed at the Government Press 70 or 80 years (at Colombo) (note 5) the Indo-portuguese has deteriorated. At the time of that publication, the Indo-portuguese was a medium of communication between Europeans and Sinhalese and Tamils. The Portuguese have left no “Portuguese” descendants here, as in Goa, and other parts of India. The Dutch settlers intermarried with the families of Portuguese descent (mestiças) and a material part of the “Dutch” descendants of this day are from this source. The European “Portuguese”  left and were compelled to leave Ceylon. The “Burghers” or Citizens of the Chief Maritime towns were chiefly composed of these Mestiça descendants and early English authors remarked on the use of the Portuguese as the domestic language in preference to Dutch, but this was what we should expect, the Portuguese being the mother language. The same thing had been remarked in India, and “the Straits” (Batavia Str) the slaves, the free servants, the young children, even the ladies of the best local families used the easy home Portuguese. The spelling of this corrupt Portuguese was affected by the contact with the written official language which was, of course, Dutch. The Missionary bodies, notably the “Wesleyans” found it necessary to print hymns, and portions of Scripture including a complete New Testament (note 6) and this compelling as it did a reference to the Scriptures in the European Portuguese sold by the Bible Society, reformed the spelling and fixed it. Then the Church of England Liturgy (common Prayer Book) was printed for the Congregation who only knew the Indo-Portuguese patois. (note 7) The diffusion of the English language by the Government of Ceylon  and the Missionary bodies has diminished the use of this form of language and lately the spelling seems to have followed the peculiarities of English orthography. The anomalies you have noted have had this and no other origin. In India, being a continent, and with Portuguese centres like Goa, such incongruities have not arisen. This must serve for the general theory I have not the opportunity of giving instances. As for the influence of the Sinhalese upon the Indo-Portuguese, terms have no doubt been borrowed. In Jaffna (North Ceylon) where Tamil is the vernacular even verbs are borrowed. Thus chundi (a local Tamil term from 
shunda a fight?) is used for bate or the corrupt 
bata, noticed by you. “Who is knocking at the door?” is in this very corrupt form “Quem te chundi porta? A phrase familiarly used to illustrate the difference from the Colombo Indo-Portuguese. I had lately a manuscript Istori de Helena which with the Istori de Ourson e  Falentyn (note 8), in your possession, supplied a secular literature to the Portuguese speaking classes who were shut out from European books. From the F used in spelling Falentyn, your story is translated from the Dutch in which language V has the sound of F. These M.S.S are not now written and even books printed by the Religious societies are now becoming scarce. The Portuguese speaking congregations are substituting English and trying to assimilate with the European descendants. Ethnologically they have not been European descendants though it is the fashion with some persons to speak of them as such. You have supplied a philological proof of this in the examples t’anda pasiave, t’andave pasia, elli te lembrava, Etc. You ask are these forms from the Sinhalese?! I think they are present participial forms. Thus compare
yanawa, going; evidinawa walking;
enawa, coming;
hitanawa, thinking; with andava, 
pasiava, lembrava, Etc; and construing them as present participial  forms of anda, 
pasia + lembra translate them with the context (which I have not before me) and you will most probably find the solution. In fact the Indo-Portuguese 
patois in Ceylon (or the Sinhalese districts of Ceylon) – was borrowing grammatical forms from the language in contact; and was taking a distinct philological development of great interest to the student of languages and comparative grammar
bata for bate | are all ortho-
vença for vence | graphical corrupt-
cumse for cumçar | ions or plagiary-
persuade for torna | isms. As you
have for V the F in Valentyn so in the first attempts at writing the patois (during the Dutch period) there was, as I have already remarked, the influence of the Dutch orthography. Next followed a period when English terms for  any abstract or unexpressed idea or object became amusingly mixed with the Vocabulary already formed. I think I have now fulfilled the task you have set me and it has given me peculiar pleasure to do so as I am not in the academical sense a learned man and feel it a pleasure to help professors who can permanently preserve these curiosities of Europe in the East.
Yours very truly
Louis Nell

P. S. I post a little pamphlet “In Memory of Christian Samuel Kohlhoff” namely of my present wife’s (note 9) father. He was a good Tamil scholar.
See private PS.
_____________________________________________1 Nell, Louis. 1888-9. An explanatory list of Portuguese words adopted by the Sinhalese. In The Orientalist 3: 41-56.2 Yule, H. & A.C. Burnell. 1886. Hobson-Jobson; being a glossary of Anglo-Indian words and phrases, and of kindred terms; etymological, historical, geographical, and discursive. London: Murray.3 

Christophe Ernest Bonjean (1823-1882), a French Catholic missionary who served in South India and in Ceylon, became Archbishop of Colombo in 1887.4 Nell, Louis. 1888-9. An explanatory list of Dutch words adopted by the Sinhalese. In The Orientalist 3(7,8): 133-144.5 According to this description, Nell is surely referring to Berrenger’s A grammatical arrangement on the method of learning the corrupted Portuguese as spoken in India, published in 1811 at the Government Press in Colombo.6 Newstead, Robert. 1852. O novo testamento de nossa senhor Jesus Christo. Colombo: Wesleyan Mission Press.7 With this, Nell could potentially be referring to: Newstead, Robert. 1871. Cantigas per adoração publico, em lingua portugueza de Ceylon. Colombo: Wesleyan Mission Press.8 According to Dalgado (1900: 83-84), this story was published in various numbers of the Ceylon Portuguese-language journal 
O Bruffador and a limited number of bound copies were printed at the time in Colombo. Dalgado (1900: 124-126) transcribes a few stanzas.9 

Caroline Eliza Cherrington.