Vizella, August 31, 1894.
Schuchardt Yaun maitea, 
Axularek dio # (472. Inchauspe) “Consolamendu handia da, bere trabailluetan eta egitecoetan, lagun on baten içaitea”. Therefore I was pleased at getting your card from Hungary, the first I think I have ever had thence, yesterday and the proof of your reply to Vinson also. Your are too gentle with him. Much harm has been done by the false reputation he has aquired as an authority on the language. His writings are full of proofs of his ignorance. Ask any of the native writers if this is not true. It is very common in Basque sentences to find an intransitive subject mentally transferred to the transitive or vice versa, and it is not always easy to say whether the ablative absolute like utzirik on p. 538 is active or passive. You will find even in good writers words ending in ek used as the accusative plural, but this termination is properly the sign of the nominative active. You may be wrong about lagunek utzirik. On p. 536 I think you a little Jesuitical about the double dative. for ich habe ihn dir is quite unlike sie sind mir dir. Is it not? What does Levelező-Lap mean? I envy you your knowledge of Magyar, & it is very interesting (note 1) to know that you are among the Roumanians of Hungary of whom Mr Picot speaks to often. I do not quite understand the logic of your sentence beginning Man kann sich noch immer nicht über das Larramendische etc: What is the force of doch? is there not a wie, at least, omitted after it? You mean I suppose that 
Larramendi did not explain all the supposed difficulties of Basque. Do you know any language capable of explaining Basque BOLU = mill? Can it come from Latin MOL? It was Miss Ei, a westphalian friend of Carolina Michaelis, who suggested the Basque egg in Arolsen. I see not why the prehistoric Basques may not have left traces of themselves all over Asia, Africa, and Europe. You think g in ugarte is not a mere result of the omission of the r of ur, as in ur-antzi = pond & other compounds, but a relic of biga, if I understand you. Lizarraga in his coplac has g as the initial of the pronouns which in Labourdin begin with  (note 2) h. the guttural h of Castilian explains this I suppose. I have sent 
Vinson the corrigenda of my article on Capanaga. he will publish it in the October number of the R. de. L.
If I send you an article on D’Urte will you send it with a note of recommendation to Gröbers Zeitschrift Either in the original English, or with your own version if you will do me the honour to find time to write one? If you wish the Academy to publish my translation of your article on the Princes Library send it to Mr. Thomas who is intimate with the Mr. Cotton the Editor. The latter is determined to print nothing against 
Webster or 
Vinson. In my article which it rejected I said the very least possible against the faults in Vs appendix to D’Urte. I am about to send to M
rThomas, at his own request, a list of the misprints in D’Urte. I shall send copies to Euskara and R. de  (note 3) L pro bono publico. The Californiako Heskual Herria of 14 July has a friendly article on the Vizeu edition of Capanaga and on the Oxford edition of D’Urte. The Basques say cho or tcho not only to animals but to human beings. The Portuguese and Spaniards apply it only to animals I believe, either to make them be silent or stand still. Is it a latin or an Iberian exclamation?
Is Catalan 
Ca no! no ca! related to the Irish negative? Mr Constantino Elices of Ginzo de Limia, Orense is ready to tell you about bai being used in the valley of that river which the antients (note 4) thought was Lethe. It is curious that the other Galicia should likewise have had a river Lethe. May the Hercules bad have no bad effect on you but afford you new strength for all your laborious studies! My address till the 9th of September will be Poste Restante, Oporto. After that Pedras Salgadas. I have just finished Fragmentos Etymologicos (Porto 1894), the gift of the authoress, who will remain here a little longer. I heard auga for agua at Sa Comba a village near here the day before yesterday. I have heard ba ba here, apparently for yes yes, so, so, as in Basque.
now Goodbye – yours truly
E. S. Dodgson. 

 (note 5) The Portuguese speak as if they were ashamed of their language; the Castilians as if every letter were sacred.
 (note 6) In D’Urte f. 94 arrosategi is wrong: it means rose-bed. f 116 verso for direla read dituc. ozar is not obsolete. f. 48. verso. verse 7 cituen should be cituela. Je vois là la main de Vinson hélas!
 (note 7) This manuscript is not pretty, but the heat must be my excuse.
_____________________________________________1 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite: I enclose Canon Adémas Gauden gu Eskualdun with his music.2 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite: I leave Vizella on the 5th of September. Do you think I coud earn any money at Graz by teaching English for a semester?3 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite: I saw Dames new Roumanian-French Dictionary at Coimbra. I have now 3 parts of Pallioppis Roumantsch Lexicon.4 Sic für ancients.5 Randnotiz auf der linken Seite.6 Notiz kopfüber am oberen Rand und anschließend den linken Rand hinunter geschrieben.7 This manuscript is not pretty, but the heat must be my excuse.